Dear Helen, Massimo, Michael, Abigail and Briar,

it is still strong in my soul the echo of the terrific adventure I had the opportunity to live. Again thanks a lot to all for this.
As I probably discussed with all of you, during the approach to the event I have been continuosly wondering about the evolution of the whole process, asking whether what I felt in terms of exploration of the possible could be quantifiable and descripted in terms of some relevant patterns. With this idea in mind I played a bit with the material I had available, the 12 versions of my scripts. I adopted a technique I developed a few years back to spot ghost writers behind well-known aliases. I don't enter into the details but roughly speaking I use data-compression techniques (the same you adopt to compress your file on your computers) to define a similarity between texts (in general sequences of characters). In practice what I did has been comparing all the versions of my script to look for patterns in their similarities. The result I got is summarized in the attached graph. I give a few details below but in a nutshell it is quite evident the presence of at least two distinct phases. A first one I dubbed "free exploration phase" in which, thanks to Michael and Abigail, I wondered in the space of possibilities, not yet fixing a specific idea (and rewriting from scratch the script every time). This lasted around 1 months and a half. This phase has been followed by a second phase I dubbed "Convergence phase" (we could also say "exploitation phase") in which it is clear I took a direction and then spend the rest of the time refining the overall concept (again with the help of Michael and Abigail and all of you during rehersals and offline sessions). This was the impression I had during the process and this is beautifully confirmed by the data. 

Now, before drawing a few conclusions, let me give you a few details about the graph. Time is on the x-axis flowing backward from right (100 days to the event) to left (event). What is plotted is the similarity with the final script. It is of course decreasing over time. In the first phase you can see as the decrease is very mild. This is the "explore" phase in which I basically jumped here and there looking for the right direction. At some point, perhaps 1 month away from the event, apparently I took a definite direction and then progressively and spent time polishing the whole thing. The same picture is confirmed looking at the scripts from the point of view of al the other versions. 

I think this is a very interesting starting point to deeply investigate how we progress while approaching an important deadline (a TED, but also the delivery of a book to the editor, going on stage at theater, etc.) and more generally how we find a balance between the quest for an "optimum" and the contraints we all have. I suspect that the first phase is perhaps the only phase present in childs provided they do not have committments while as soon as you start having contraints (time, space, etc.) sooner or later you need to access the second phase.

So I think it would be extremely interesting to check whether the kind of patterns I found on my scripts are actually more universal and found also in other stories of approach to a TED. Perhaps independent of the specific topic addressed. For this reason it would be very interesting to collect a large database of series of scripts (suitably anonymized) and look at them as I did for my scripts. I know speakers could be very shy in sharing their scripts but, as you can see, all the results would be fully independent of the specific person and we would only display general and aggregated trends and patterns. 
What do you think? 

Looking forward to your feedback.
My warmest regards,

Vittorio
