The birth of the possible Vittorio Loreto  I think we all guessed, at least once, how great minds achieved what they achieved. And the more astonishing their achievements are, the more we call them “geniuses”, perhaps aliens coming from a different planet, definitely not someone like us. But…is that true? Let me start with an example. Is the story of Newton’ apple true? Probably not. Still, it is difficult to think that no apple at all was there. I mean some stepping stones, some specific conditions that made “Universal Gravitation” not impossible to conceive. And definitely this was not impossible, at least for Newton. It was “possible” and for some reason it was also there, available, to Newton, …at some point easy to pick as an apple.  And what about Einstein? Was “Relativity Theory” another big leap in the history of ideas no one else could even consider? Or, rather, was again something “adjacent” and “possible” to Einstein and he got there by small steps in his very peculiar scientific path? The fact that we cannot even conceive his path does not mean that no path was there. All this seems very evocative, though hardly concrete if we really want to grasp the origin of great ideas, and, more generally, the way in which the new enters our lives. As a physicist, I’ve learned that posing the right questions is half of the solution. And I think we now start having a conceptual framework to conceive and address the right questions. So, let me drive you at the edge of what is known (or at least what I’ve learned) and show you that what we know can be a powerful and fascinating starting point to grasp the deep meaning of words like novelties or innovation; even creativity. So we are discussing about the “new”.  The new can enter our lives in many different ways. It could be very personal, like listening to a new song, reading a new book, meeting a new person, learning a new word,… or could be global, what we call innovation, like a new theory, a new technology, but also a new book from Stephen King or a new song by Madonna.  The new is always defying us in many different ways. And it is also scaring us because it makes us feel uncertain. But experiencing the new also means exploring a very peculiar space.  The space of the possible. The space of possibilities.  It could be a physical space - the novelty here would be climbing for the first time Machu Picchu (as I did in 2016) or … landing on the moon; it could be a conceptual space – acquiring new information and make sense of them; in a word: learning; but it could also be a biological space – think about the never-ending fight of viruses or bacteria with our immune system. Unfortunately we are very bad at grasping this space. Think of it. Think about for instance “all” the possible things you could do in the next, say, 24 hours. Here the keyword is “all”. Of course we can conceive a few options: “having a drink”, “writing a letter”, “sleeping during this boring talk”. But not all of them. So guessing and grasping this space of possibilities, is very difficult. Still we definitely need to explore it for our own sake and the progress of mankind. There is a good reason why we are very bad at this. We are trying to conceive the occurrence of something new, something that never occurred before. One typical solution is looking at the future with the eyes of the past. This means looking at the time series of past events, hoping that this is enough to predict the future. We know this is not working. This was the first attempt, for instance, for weather predictions. And it failed, even with a lot of available data, because of the great complexity of the underlying phenomenon. We now know that predictions have to be based on modeling, which means constructing a model of the phenomenon and simulating it, projecting the system into the future. And now we can do that with the help of a lot of data. Looking at the future with the eyes of the past could be misleading also for machines. Picture yourself now in the Australian outback. You stand there, under the sun, and you see something weird. A car suddenly stops, very very far from a kangaroo crossing the street. You look closer and you realize that the car has no driver and it is not restarting even after the kangaroo is not there anymore. For some reason the algorithms driving the car cannot make sense of these new strange animal jumping here and there!  This is perhaps the last example of a problem that progressively will affect more and more our algorithms of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning. But this problem, that of coping with the occurrence of new events, is very and I think we now start having important clues to solve it. One of the formulations of this problem is named “Species sampling”.  You want to count the number of species in a given environment. Now you wander in the environment and every time you see a new species you count +1. The problem now is to figure out how long you have to wait before encountering a new species. By definition, the new species is new, and so you don’t have a clue. We should rather find some other self-consistent way to estimate this probability of new events. The winter of 2012 was very special in Rome that experienced one of the greatest snowfall of its history. That winter was special also for me and my colleagues because we had an insight for a mathematical scheme to model the way in which novelties appear. I remember that day, because due to the snowfall we were stuck in my department and we couldn’t go home. So we got another coffee and we kept discussing. And at some point we made a connection between the problem of the new and a beautiful concept proposed, years ago, by Stuart Kauffman: the “adjacent possible”.  The idea behind this is that whenever innovation occurs this does not proceed by large leaps. Rather it exploits, all those things (could be ideas molecules, technological products) that are already there, available and possible, perhaps recombining old elements in a brand new way. In Steven Johnson’s words “The strange and beautiful truth of the adjacent possible is that its boundaries grow as you explore them”. For instance if I speak about the space of my friends, my adjacent possible is the set of all friends of my friends, not already my friends. But if I now meet a new person, all her friends would immediately enter my adjacent possible, pushing its boundaries further. The mathematical structure of all this could be pictured like this:  Suppose this is your universe and you explore it by jumping from one node to another. White nodes are those never explored before. In this sense they represent your adjacent possible. So you keep moving and at some point you touch the new. And what happens? What happens is there is a new part of the space that appears at some point that you could not even foresee before touching that point. So it’s not that the space is predefined, the space is defined by your actions. This structure allowed us to give, after more than 20 years since Kaufmann’s proposal, a concrete life to the abstract notion of adjacent possible. In our mathematical construction the space of possibilities is not predefined. It rather expands (or gets restructured) while you explore it, which means through our actions. After the epiphany of 2012 we kept working on the theory of the adjacent possible and submitted it to test in real life. Let me spend now a minute to tell you what the theory predicts and its consequences. I’m sure a little of technical details will not get you lost. The first thing concerns the statistical patterns behind innovation: which means the frequency of occurrence of events and the rate at which we observe innovation…. We observed a remarkable universality in these behaviors in many diverse systems: from Twitter to Wikipedia, from the production of free software to the listening of music. But there is much more. The very notion of the adjacent possible encodes somehow the popular belief that “one thing leads to another”. I guess we all experienced this. You listen to “Suzanne” of Leonard Cohen and this experience triggers your passion for Cohen and you frantically start listening to his whole production. And then you realize that Fabrizio De Andrè recorded an Italian version of Suzanne, and so on and so forth. We can now give a scientific substance to this intuition and our theory precisely predicts this. We call it the phenomenon of correlated novelties and it occurs in many different systems, for instance in the way we listen to music or the way in which we contribute to Wikipedia. The red dots here, in this representation based on the notion of entropy, tell us the level of correlation among novelty events compared to what we would expect by chance. [Slide with proofs of the correlated novelties. For the time being only a placeholder.] So, novelties are definitely correlated. This is the second consequence of the reality of the adjacent possible. The third one concerns what we called waves of novelties. So if you think about music, without waves of novelties we would be listening only to Mozart or Beethoven. But we don’t do this all the time. We also listen to the Pet Shop Boys, even though I don’t know them.  Here you see these waves of novelties, in terms of the age of the most popular elements at a specific point in time for various systems. Not only our theory predicts these waves of novelties but it also explains why they are there. And they are there because we, as humans, display different strategies in the space of the possible. The Clash would say: “Should I stay or should I go”.  Some people tend to retrace already known paths. We say they exploit. Some people always launch in new adventures. They explore. And we discovered that all the systems we investigated are right at the edge between these two strategies. Somehow it seems that a wise balance of past and future, “exploiting” and “exploring”, is needed and this is clearly emerging from our theory. Now we can go back to the first question of whether innovation proceeds through little steps or large leaps (remember Newton and Einstein?) 12 minutes (cut after this!!!) If our theory, based on the adjacent possible, is true, we should conclude that Newton did not get the idea of the Universal Gravitation out of nothing, as a thunderbolt. Universal Gravitation was “possible” and “adjacent” to him. And the same for Einstein for General Relativity. But our theory says that this is a general feature of the way all of us experience the new. Not only Newton and Einstein. We constantly have the opportunity to explore and push the boundaries of our own adjacent possible and innovate. We may sometimes judge the possibilities in front of us as weird. But sometimes weird things are weird only because they are new. And perhaps these unfamiliar routes can lead us to some major breakthrough, who knows. So, again, reading the future with the lenses of the past could be misleading. Childs often don’t know that something is impossible and they just do it! All this is fascinating to me. The whole notion of adjacent possible is and our theory already tells us a lot about a space of possibilities and the way we constantly create and reinvent it. But of course this is only the starting point of a very important journey for all of us to foster our ability, or that of machines, to cope with the future. Of course a lot can and will be done in the near future to make Artificial Intelligence algorithms ready to cope with the new. But we definitely need to raise a generation of people aware of their potential and able to come up with new ideas to face the challenges in front of us. We need to foster creativity, as perhaps the only skill to find our path in a complex and ever-changing environment. Infrastructures like this one, the KREYON City, can help us with this. Here people of all ages, collectively build a city, with houses, factories, schools, infrastructures and services. The city is monitored through cameras and sensors, playing the role of observation satellites, to enable participants to have a feedback about the effectiveness of their solutions to let the city thrive in equilibrium with all its needs: services, jobs, energy, etc. With infrastructures and experiments like we can see individual and collective creativity in action, assess the present and plan the future. No one has the crystal ball, but I think we now have new tools for a scientific investigation of our adjacent possible and the way in which we explore it. For instance whenever we learn something or whenever we do research, or business or any other thing. It is a long way to go but the questions and the tools are now there, adjacent and possible. THANK YOU  