The birth of possible Vittorio Loreto We have all probably wondered, at least once, how great minds achieved what they achieved. The more astonishing their achievements are, the more we call them “geniuses”, perhaps aliens coming from a different planet, definitely not someone like us. But…is that true? [Slide with Newton] Let me start with an example. Is the story of Newton’s apple true? Probably not! Still, it is difficult to think that no apple at all was there. I mean some stepping-stones, some specific conditions that made “Universal Gravitation” not impossible to conceive. And definitely this was not impossible, at least for Newton. It was “possible” and for some reason it was also there, available, to Newton, …at some point easy to pick as an apple. [Slide with Einstein] And what about Einstein? Was “Relativity Theory” another big leap in the history of ideas no one else could even consider? Or, rather, was again something “adjacent” and “possible” to Einstein and he got there by small steps in his very peculiar scientific path? The fact that we cannot even conceive his path does not mean that no path was there. All this seems very evocative, though hardly concrete if we really want to grasp the origin of great ideas, and, more generally, the way in which the new enters our lives. As a physicist, I’ve learned that posing the right questions is half of the solution. And I think we now start having a conceptual framework to conceive and address the right questions. So, let me drive you at the edge of what is known about the new and show you that what we know can be a powerful and fascinating starting point to grasp the deep meaning of words like novelties or innovation; even creativity. [Slide with “The New”] So we are discussing about the “new” and the science behind it. The new can enter our lives in many different ways. It could be very personal, like listening to a new song, reading a new book, meeting a new person, learning a new word,… …or could be global, what we call innovation, like a new theory, a new technology, but could also be a new book if you are the writer or a new song if you are the composer. In all these cases this is new for everyone. The new is always defying us in many different ways. And it is also scaring us because it makes us feel uncertain. But experiencing the new also means exploring a very peculiar space. [Slide with “Actual” and “Possible”] The space of the possible. The space of possibilities. [Set of slides with the physical, conceptual and biological space] It could be a physical space - the novelty here would be climbing for the first time Machu Picchu (as I did in 2016) or … landing on the moon (as I did in …, well…no! not really!); [Click slide] it could be a conceptual space – acquiring new information and making sense of it; in a word: learning; [Click slide] but it could also be a biological space – think about the never-ending fight of viruses or bacteria with our immune system. Unfortunately we are very bad at grasping this space. Think of it. Think about “all” the possible things you could do in the next, say, 24 hours. Here the keyword is “all”. [Click slide (ALL)]. Of course you can conceive a few options: “having a drink”, “writing a letter”, “sleeping during this boring talk”. But not all of them. An alien invasion here, now, in Milan? There is a good reason why we are very bad at conceiving the way in which we explore this space. We are trying to conceive the occurrence of something new, something that never occurred before. So, we don’t have clues. One typical solution is looking at the future with the eyes of the past. This means looking at the time series of past events, hoping that this is enough to predict the future. We know this is not working. This was the first attempt, for instance, for weather forecast. And it failed, because of the great complexity of the underlying phenomenon. We now know that predictions have to be based on modeling, which means constructing a model of the phenomenon and simulating it, projecting the system into the future. And now we can do that with the help of a lot of data. Looking at the future with the eyes of the past could be misleading also for machines. [Slide with the Australian Outback] Picture yourself now in the Australian outback. You stand there, under the sun, and you see something weird happening. [Click slide] A car suddenly stops, very very far from a kangaroo crossing the street. You look closer and you realize that the car has no driver and it is not restarting even after the kangaroo is not there anymore. For some reason the algorithms driving the car cannot make sense of these new strange animal jumping here and there! So it just stops. [Click slide] What I just told you is a true story that happened to Volvo self-driving cars in the Australian outback. This problem will progressively affect more and more our algorithms of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning. But this problem, that of coping with the occurrence of new events, is very old and I think we now have important clues to solve it. [Click blank slide] The winter of 2012 was very special in Rome that experienced one of the greatest snowfall of its history. That winter was special also for me and my colleagues because we had an insight for a mathematical scheme to model the way in which new things appear. I remember that day, because due to the snowfall we were stuck in my department and we couldn’t go home. So we got another coffee and we kept discussing. And at some point we made a connection between the problem of the new and a beautiful concept proposed, years before, by Stuart Kauffman: the “adjacent possible”. The adjacent possible consists of all those things (ideas, molecules, technological products) that are one step away from what actually exists, and can be obtained with incremental modifications and recombinations of existing material. For instance if I speak about the space of my friends, my adjacent possible is the set of all friends of my friends, not already my friends. But if I now meet a new person, say John, all his friends would immediately enter my adjacent possible, pushing its boundaries further. The mathematical structure of all this could be pictured in this way: [Click slide with the animation of the Adjacent Possible] Suppose this is your universe and you explore it by jumping from one node to another. Green nodes are those never explored before. In this sense they represent your adjacent possible. So you keep moving and at some point you touch the new. And what happens? What happens is there is a new part of the space, your adjacent possible, that appears at some point that you could not even foresee before touching that point. And besides this there is another huge portion of the space that could become possible at some later stages. So the whole space of the possible is not predefined. It is rather shaped and reshaped by our choices and actions. We were so fascinated by this whole idea and based on this we conceived our mathematical formulation of the adjacent possible. And our mathematical theory is based on a complex interplay between the way in which the space of possibilities expands (or gets restructured) and the way in which we explore it. After the epiphany of 2012 we kept working on the mathematical model for the adjacent possible and we came up with a certain number of predictions to be tested in real life. This means we now have a testable framework to study innovation. The first prediction concerns the pace for innovation, I mean the rate at which we observe novelties in a given system. Our model predicts that the rates of innovation follow a universal curve, as you can see in these graphs [Click slide with theoretical predictions] where you have the rate at which novelties appear under different conditions. In all cases a steady decrease of the innovation pace is expected. In other words innovation is predicted to become progressively more difficult. In order to see whether this prediction is verified in reality, we collected a lot of data -- terabytes of data tracking innovations at Wikipedia, Twitter, the way we create free-software, even how we listen to music. In all these cases we were excited upon discovering [Click slide with data from real systems] the match with the patterns predicted by our mathematical scheme. Apparently we were on the right track. So we went further. And we discovered a phenomenon that we dubbed “correlated novelties”. I guess we all experienced this. You listen to “Suzanne” by Leonard Cohen [Click slide Leonard Cohen] and this experience triggers your passion for Cohen and you frantically start listening to his whole production. And then you realize that Fabrizio De Andrè [Click slide Fabrizio De Andrè] recorded an Italian version of Suzanne, and so on and so forth. The very notion of the adjacent possible encodes the popular belief that “one thing leads to another”. But the reason why we were thrilled is because, through our mathematical model, we could give for the first time a scientific substance to this intuition and start making predictions about the way we experience the new. So, novelties are not occurring randomly and this is good news because it implies that “impossible missions” might not be so impossible after all if we are guided by a good intuition leading us to trigger a positive chain reaction. There is a third important consequence of our mathematical structure for the adjacent possible. We called this “waves of novelties”. [Click slide Waves of novelties] So if you think about music, without waves of novelties we would still be listening only to Mozart or Beethoven. But we don’t do this. Now we also listen to the Pet Shop Boys or Justin Bieber. Well, some of us do. We can see this clearly from the huge amounts of data we analyzed. For instance, we discovered that popular hits are continuously born and then disappear, still leaving room for evergreens. Waves of novelties ebb and flow while the tides always hold the classics. Our theory not only predicts these waves of novelties but it also explains why they are there. And they are there because we, as humans, display different strategies in the space of the possible. [Click slide Stay-Go] Some people tend to retrace already known paths. We say they exploit. Some people always launch in new adventures. They explore. We discovered that overall all the systems we investigated are right at the edge between these two strategies, with the average around 20% exploring and 80% exploiting. It seems that a wise balance of past and future, “exploiting” and “exploring”, is already in place at the collective level. But the good news is that through our mathematical model we can investigate how this equilibrium can be improved in the future, for us and for machines. All this is fascinating to me. Our mathematical model provides us with clues and hints about the space of possibilities and the way we all constantly create and reinvent it. And this is a starting point of what I think will be a wonderful journey for a scientific and personal investigation of the new, with the potential to impact key activities like learning, education, research and business. Artificial Intelligence for instance will need more and more to rely on the structure of the adjacent possible to restructure it and to cope with the unknowns of the future, perhaps shifting the 80/20 ratio exploit/explore. In parallel we have now tools to shed a new light on creativity and innovation processes, with the final aim to raise a generation of people able to come up with new ideas to face the challenges in front of us. It is a long way to go but the questions and the tools are now there, adjacent and possible. THANK YOU    