The arrival of the new [Alternative] The exploration of the possible Vittorio Loreto  Let me start with a list. Editing a Wikipedia page Listening to a new song Writing a new piece of free software Discovering a new author and its novel Meeting a new person And the list can be much longer? You may wonder now?What all these activities have in common? Well, you could easily say that they are all performed by human beings (well, bots are more and more present, but forget about it for now!). Ok. Now let?s add some more hints and let?s extend the list: If you were a virus or a bacterium, I?m sure you would struggle to evolve into something your immune system cannot recognize and fight.  If you were a prey in the savanna you would devise new strategies to trick your predator. If you were a Swedish self-driven car in the middle of the Australian outback you would definitely try to understand what is this strange ?animal? jumping here and there and include it in the list of animals you already recognize as deer, elks and caribous). Well, enough with the examples. Again, what all these examples have in common? I would say that in all these cases the subject, be it a human, a species, a robot, is experiencing something new. The new! The new can be very personal. I meet a new person. I read a new book. Or, it can be new for all of us, like formulating a new theory or writing a new hit. In all cases we speak about something new. And of course now we want to know more about this ?new?. Jim Morrison was singing: [Slide with Jim Morrison and the lyrics?] ?Can you picture what will be? So limitless and free?. A question that baffles all of us. ?What will be my future?? ?What will be of me??  So, let?s start trying to grasp a bit more of this ?new?. Well, I can tell you that this new has a lot of interesting properties. Let?s start with a common, though not so obvious example: a text [slide of a text] For instance this text: Let us imagine a language ...The language is meant to serve for communication between a builder A and an assistant B. A is building with building-stones; there are blocks, pillars, slabs and beams. B has to pass the stones, and that in the order in which A needs them. For this purpose they use a language consisting of the words 'block', 'pillar', 'slab', 'beam'. A calls them out; --B brings the stone which he has learnt to bring at such-and-such a call. -- Conceive of this as a complete primitive language. I can now count the number of occurrences of a given word, say ?language?, now in red:  [slide ? just a placeholder] Let us imagine a language ...The language is meant to serve for communication between a builder A and an assistant B. A is building with building-stones; there are blocks, pillars, slabs and beams. B has to pass the stones, and that in the order in which A needs them. For this purpose they use a language consisting of the words 'block', 'pillar', 'slab', 'beam'. A calls them out; --B brings the stone which he has learnt to bring at such-and-such a call. -- Conceive of this as a complete primitive language. I can repeat the same operation for all the words and rank them from the most frequent to the least frequent. Well, I get something like this: [Slide ? just a placeholder]   You see two straight lines. The first one was discovered by George K. Zipf already back in the 40?s. These straight lines are not so innocent as you can imagine. Because this is a double logarithmic scale, and in this scale these straight lines means a power-law function, the same function describing the geometry of objects like this (a broccoli romanesco) [Slide with broccoli romanesco, just a placeholder]  or this: [Slide with the Mandelbrot set, just a placeholder]  Power-laws are simple, though very special functions. They tell a story of strong regularities, the same discovered by Zipf, a story which we know now ubiquitous in systems we call ?complex?, a sort of signature of the complexity of our world. Let?s go back to our text: [Slide ? just a placeholder] Let us imagine a language ...The language is meant to serve for communication between a builder A and an assistant B. A is building with building-stones; there are blocks, pillars, slabs and beams. B has to pass the stones, and that in the order in which A needs them. For this purpose they use a language consisting of the words 'block', 'pillar', 'slab', 'beam'. A calls them out; --B brings the stone which he has learnt to bring at such-and-such a call. -- Conceive of this as a complete primitive language. We can now do something different and ask ourselves how many distinct words are there. If I color in red all the words at their first occurrence I get something like this: [Slide ? just a placeholder] Let us imagine a language ...The language is meant to serve for communication between a builder A and an assistant B. A is building with building-stones; there are blocks, pillars, slabs and beams. B has to pass the stones, and that in the order in which A needs them. For this purpose they use a language consisting of the words 'block', 'pillar', 'slab', 'beam'. A calls them out; --B brings the stone which he has learnt to bring at such-and-such a call. -- Conceive of this as a complete primitive language.  Now, if I now count the number of new (red) words as a function of the number of words read, I get a plot like this [Slide ? just a placeholder]   Again we see a power-law. But what is interesting here is that this plot is telling us something about the innovation rate. How many new words I encounter if I keep reading the text. This picture tells us a bit more. The rate of innovation is decreasing while we progress in the book and it does it in a very peculiar way, a power-law function, attributed to Harold Stanley Heaps (from whom it took the name) but originally discovered in the ?60s by Gustav Herdan. Strong regularities then in the way innovation occurs. And this is not only for texts. It occurs in many other systems [Slide] with examples from Wikipedia, Last.Fm, Github, Twitter, etc. Now, can we explain already this? If you think of it, it is already difficult to explain the Heaps? law because it implies we are able to estimate the probability of events never occurred before. What is the probability of an alien invasion right now, here, in Milan? Someone may guess that aliens are already here?but this is a different story! This is an old problem, ? , named ?Species sampling" problem. The formulation is very easy. You want to count the number of species in a given environment. Suppose you are able to distinguish two distinct species in the first place (already non trivial). Now the problem is to figure out the probability to encounter a new species. By definition the new species is new and so you don?t have a clue. We typically base our expectations on the past. But for novelties there is no past and one should find a self-consistent way to estimate this probability and explain the laws we saw till now. I think now we have an insight. Recently, with my colleagues Vito Servedio, Steven Strogatz and Francesca Tria, we introduced a mathematical scheme to model the way in which novelties appear. One formulation of the model is based on an older schemes (again standing on the shoulders of giants), named Polya?s urns, from the name of a Hungarian mathematician, George Polya. The whole thing is very simple. [Slides] Polya Urn ? animation In the classical version of this model, balls of various colors are placed in an urn. A ball is withdrawn at random, inspected, and placed back in the urn along with a certain number of new balls of the same color. If I extracted red, at the next run it will be more likely to extract another red. This is a well-known phenomenon, known as ?rich-get-richer''. This is another avenue to get power-laws and its ubiquity is extraordinary: genetics and epidemiology to linguistics and computer science. This is where we started for our theory. In our generalization a urn, initially containing a certain number of balls of distinct colors, represents the set of possibilities we have at a given point of our evolution. Whenever we drawn a ball we turn it in our reality. Francois Jacob, would say, our ?actual?. This actual is encoded in the time series, here named S, of all the extractions drawn from the urn, i.e., the history of the system. For instance the list of all the song you ever listened to. The dynamics now proceeds through two main mechanisms: reinforcement and innovation. [Slide] Animation of our modeling scheme At each time step one selects an element at random from the urn and records it in the sequence S. We then put the element chosen back into the urn along with a certain number of additional copies of itself (again rich-get-richer). The key assumption here concerns what happens if (and only if) the chosen element in the urn happens to be novel (i.e., it is appearing for the first time in the history of the system). In that case we put a certain number of brand new and distinct balls in the urn. These new elements represent the set of new possibilities triggered by the occurred novelty. This modeling scheme is encoding a very important concept, beautifully summarized by the famous biologist and complex-systems scientist Stuart Kauffman. Stuart coined the term ?adjacent possible?, meaning ?all those things that are one step away from what actually exists, and hence can arise from incremental modifications and recombination of existing material?. In Steven Johnson's words: ?The strange and beautiful truth about the adjacent possible is that its boundaries grow as one explores them.? This is the key point of the adjacent possible: the conditional expansion (or restructuring) of the space of possibilities, conditional to the exploration of the space itself and the experience of the new. Let?s see know first the conceptual consequences of all this. For instance you could have the impression that new things occur like a thunderbolt. That Newton got the idea of the Universal Gravitation out of nothing. Out of the blue. Pure genius. Or Einstein general relativity. If our theory of the adjacent possible is true this seems far from being true. Somehow Universal Gravitation and General Relativity where ?possible? and ?adjacent? for our two champions. Not for everyone, of course. But I?m sure they got there by little steps, elaborating on something they knew and exploring very wisely the set of possibilities available to them. Perhaps at the outset they judged the possibility they were exploring as weird. But sometimes weird things are weird only because they are new to us. And perhaps these unfamiliar routes can lead us to some major breakthrough, who knows. So, reading the future with the lenses of the past could be sometimes misleading. Childs often don?t know that something is impossible and they do it! But there is much more. The very notion of adjacent possible encodes somehow the popular belief that ?one thing leads to another?.  Picture yourself now at a cocktail party. 11pm. I met already 10 people. Francois Jacob would say that these 10 people are my ?actual?. My ?possible? is the set of all people to whom I could be introduced by one of my acquaintances so far. Now, at 11:15 my friend Alice introduces me to Bob. Bob was already in my list of possible and after I meet him he starts enriching my ?actual?. But this is not the only consequence. My encounter with Bob expands my adjacent possible because, immediately after my encounter with Bob, I could be possibly introduced to all Bob?s friends, not already my friend. From this perspective is like when you open a door and only after you opened that door you can see what is after and new possibilities are opening for you.  The sentence ?one things leads to another? is a prediction of our theory based on the adjacent possible and it is borne out in many different situations. We call them correlated novelties. [Slide with proofs of the correlated novelties] So novelties are correlated. This is the second consequence of the reality of the adjacent possible. But this implies that our future can be highly non-linear. We don?t know whether the story of Newton?s apple is true. What is very likely is that Newton did something at some point, or experienced something, even very small, that opened the possibility, to him, to conceive the Universal Gravitation. Big discoveries often don?t come from big premises. Very often they come from so tiny details to appear negligible. And very often they occur by chance (we would use the word serendipity), which means by the fortuitous exploration of something we would not explore in the first place. Non-linearity means this. Strong consequences can arise from almost negligible premises. All this is fascinating to me. The whole notion is adjacent possible is. It tells a story about a space, the space of possibilities, very difficult to chart. Stuart Kauffman would say ?unprestatable?. This means that we cannot prestate ?all? the possibilities in front of us. Can you picture ?all? the things you could be doing in the next, say, 24 hours? Sounds like a well-posed question. Partly it is. But think of it and consider the most important word in that sentence: ?all?! Of course you can picture a few things: washing your teeth, eating, hopefully still sleeping after this talk?. You can also rule out something you would never do: base-jumping from the Pirelli tower. Still this is what Felix Baumgartner did in 1999! The point is also that you don?t even consider something that is possible! On the other hand something is not directly possible to you in the next 24 hours, say getting on the moon surface. This could be possible in a while but would not be possible right now. So, picturing ?all? the possibilities sounds like impossible. Still this is the space we constantly explore and modify in our everyday life. It would be desirable to know more about that space, its structure, its restructuring, its dynamics, the way in which we explore it, individually or collectively. Even more importantly I guess we are all interested in knowing how we should choose among all the options we can see in front of us. Not all of them are equivalent. The Clash would say ?Should I stay or should I go?. Should I retrace already known paths. Or should I perhaps launch in new adventures. This we don?t know! What we do know is that all the systems we investigated are right at the edge between ?exploiting? and ?exploring?. Both ?only? retracing old steps (exploiting) or ?only? choosing new avenues (exploring) would presumably make our mankind disappear. We need a wise combination of both options. Which combination and how to know it in advance is something very difficult. Still we have now tools to start investigating how to optimize to optimize the exploration of our adjacent possible, as individuals (learning something), or communities (schools, research or business centers, companies, etc.). It is a long way to go but the questions are now there, adjacent and possible. THANK YOU 