The arrival of the new [Alternative] The exploration of the possible Vittorio Loreto [Accompanying slides, images, videos still need to be decided] "Can you picture what will be? So limitless and free" Jim Morrison was stating, yet in a different way, a question that baffles all of us. "What will be my future?" "What will be of me?" Now: can you picture what I'll be saying in a moment? You would certainly expect I'll be speaking in English. Well! it is almost true! But I guess you don't have a clue about the actual content. It is perfectly possible, though unlikely, that I'll be silent for my 13 minutes. Predicting the future challenges our cognitive abilities since ever. And predicting the future means guessing the most likely outcome of a given situation, out of a certain number of possibilities. In the fifties, Claude Shannon, the father of information theory, proposed a game to measure the complexity of human languages. The game consisted in reconstructing a whole text letter by letter. When we play this game we rely on our knowledge of language, its rules and its redundancies. In the case of language we mostly know the set of outcomes. We would not expect a brand new letter - I mean totally invented - appearing at some point. In this case the space of possibilities is given. Perhaps huge, but known. Well, almost known! Think about guessing the next word instead of the next letter. The number of combinations explodes and we can still expect the author stuffed unknown words in his/her text. In this case the space of possibilities is almost well-defined and we don't have a clue to predict the occurrence of a crazy word just invented by the author. A real puzzle! A puzzle that is spell out very clearly in probability theory, well, that branch of probability theory named "inference". Inference is concerned with the estimation of probabilities of future events based on the observation of the past. But, what can we say when we observe an event whose existence we did not even previously suspect; this is the so-called problem of ‘unanticipated knowledge'. A big actor of self-driving cars recently admitted that its cars get confused by kangaroos, though they know how to avoid deer, elks and caribous! Novelties can baffle us! Just to give you an example of how tough is this problem, imagine to be at a big gathering on a island and suppose you are interested in finding your soul mate among the thousands of party guests. So you wander through the island and start meeting people and you count them, not stopping even after you met what you perceive as your soul mate (how silly you are!). Suppose of course that the island is somehow sealed (no one can get there or leave, at least while you count the guests). I concede this is not the most exciting activity while there, but, just stay with me for a moment with this. Let's also suppose you're also able to recognize the party guests you already met so that you don't count them twice. By the way, this operation would have been impossible for Funes, the main character of the Borges' tale. Funes, after falling off his horse and receiving a bad head injury, acquired the amazing talent - or curse- of remembering absolutely "everything". So he would not recognize the same person 10 minutes after because that person would not be identically the same! For instance, a different position of the hand. Now, in your "exciting" activity at the party you keep meeting people and you stubbornly keep counting all the new encounters (despite the soul mate you already identified is waiting for you at the bar). Before you realize how ridiculous you are, you may wonder about the probability to make a new encounter, i.e., being introduced to someone never met before. Well, that's not easy at all. You're about to estimate the probability of something that never occurred before. You don't have a clue! And of course you keep asking why you started counting new people in the first place! Besides the "funny" (!) story, there is deep truth. We don't know how to estimate the probabilities of occurrence of novelties. What is the probability of an alien invasion right now, here, in Milan? Someone may guess that aliens are already here…but this is a different story! All in all we are left with the problem of charting what's next, charting what it will be possible and, perhaps more importantly, which of the possible futures you like most or which one is heralding the best for you. We are back to square one, i.e., to picturing what will be. Let's try to phrase it in a more focused way. Can you picture "all" the things you could be doing in the next, say, 24 hours? Sounds like a well-posed question. Partly it is. But think of it and consider the most important word in that sentence: "all"! Of course you can picture a few things: washing your teeth, eating, hopefully still sleeping after this talk…. You can also rule out something you would never do: base-jumping from the Pirelli tower. Still this is what Felix Baumgartner did in 1999! The point is also that you don't even consider something that is possible! On the other hand something is not directly possible to you in the next 24 hours, say getting on the moon surface. This could be possible in a while but would not be possible right now. So, picturing "all" the possibilities sounds like impossible. These considerations have been beautifully summarized by the famous biologist and complex-systems scientist Stuart Kauffman. Stuart coined the term "adjacent possible", meaning all those things that are one step away from what actually exists, and hence can arise from incremental modifications and recombination of existing material. In Steven Johnson's words: "The strange and beautiful truth about the adjacent possible is that its boundaries grow as one explores them." This is the key point of the adjacent possible: the conditional expansion (or restructuring) of the space of possibilities, conditional to the exploration of the space itself and the experience of the new. The very definition of adjacent possible encodes what Francois Jacob named the dichotomy between the “actual” and the “possible”, the actual realization of a given phenomenon and the space of possibilities still unexplored. We can picture this going back to the example of our party on a island. I'm there and my “actual” at 11pm is the set of people I already met till then. My “possible” is the set of all people to whom I could be introduced by one of my acquaintances so far. Now, at 11:15 my friend Alice introduces me to Bob. Bob was already in my list of possible and after I meet him he starts enriching my “actual”. But this is not the only consequence. My encounter with Bob expands my adjacent possible because, immediately after my encounter with Bob, I could be possibly introduced to all Bob's friends, not already my friend. From this perspective is like when you open a door and only after you opened that door you can see what is after and new possibilities are opening for you. The notion of adjacent possible is a fascinating one. It tells a story about a space, the space of possibilities, very difficult to chart. Stuart Kauffman would say "unprestatable". This means that we cannot prestate "all" the possibilities in front of us. Still this is the space we constantly explore and modify in our everyday life. It would be desirable to know more about that space, its structure, its restructuring, its dynamics, the way in which we explore it, individually or collectively. Recently, in collaboration with Vito Servedio, Steven Strogatz and Francesca Tria, I have introduced a first mathematical model of the dynamics of novelties correlated via the adjacent possible. The modeling scheme is based on older schemes, named Polya's urns. The whole thing is very simple. In the classical version of this model, balls of various colors are placed in an urn. A ball is withdrawn at random, inspected, and placed back in the urn along with a certain number of new balls of the same color, thereby increasing that color's likelihood of being drawn again in later rounds. The resulting ``rich-get-richer'' dynamics leads to skewed distributions and has been used to model the emergence of power laws and related heavy-tailed phenomena in fields ranging from genetics and epidemiology to linguistics and computer science. In our generalization a urn, initially containing a certain number, say N_0, of balls of distinct colors, represents the set of possibilities, i.e., the adjacent possible. The actual is here represented by the series, S, of the extractions drawn from the urn, i.e., the history of the system. Just as the adjacent possible expands when something novel occurs, the contents of the urn itself are assumed to enlarge whenever a novel (never extracted before) element is withdrawn. The evolution proceeds through two main mechanisms: reinforcement and expansion of the adjacent possible. At each time step one selects an element at random from the urn and records it in the sequence. We then put the element chosen back into the urn along with a certain number of additional copies of itself. This reinforcement process triggers a rich-get-richer mechanism, i.e., the more likely use of an element in a given context. The key assumption concerns what happens if (and only if) the chosen element in the urn happens to be novel (i.e., it is appearing for the first time in the history of the system. In that case we put a certain number of brand new and distinct balls in the urn. These new elements represent the set of new possibilities triggered by the occurred novelty. The model mathematically predicts the notion that "one thing leads to another", i.e., the intuitive idea, I guess we all have, that innovation processes are non-linear and the conditions for the occurrence of a given event could realize only after something else happened. We had youtube only after we got broadband connectivity. Think about youtube with a 32k modem! The expansion of the adjacent possible, conditioned on the occurrence of a novelty, is the crucial ingredient in this modeling scheme, to derive several testable and quantitative predictions. For instance predictions about the rate of innovation, i.e., the rate at which we observe new things, along as the correlations between innovation events, the emergence of waves of novelties, trends, etc. For instance we may wonder why, if a rich-get-richer mechanism is at play, we don't keep listening classical music all the time instead of getting crazy for the ultimate boy band. The predictions we made based on our modeling scheme were shown to be borne out in several data sets drawn from social and technological systems: composing novels, editing Wikipedia pages, listening songs through Last.fm, writing open-source software, introducing hashtags in Twitter … and the list can be long, including examples in technology (patents) and biology. But this would take us too far! Now, I think we are heading to the conclusions. I told you a story about surprise, complexity, space of possibilities. It is right the exploration of the space of possibilities, the adjacent possible, be it a physical (wandering on a space), conceptual (learning something), biological (evolving as a species), technological (innovating), that triggers our encounters with the new and drives what we call innovation. This is a fascinating journey and it is right through this journey that creativity emerges, in the way we create new dimensions and unprestatable solutions. Also scientifically I think we are just at the beginning of a fascinating path where many and new questions, "adjacent" and "possible", are popping up just because we opened a dimension for them. For instance: questions about the nature of creativity for humans and machines and the strategies to foster them; questions about the best environments to foster innovation. A better understanding of the space of possibilities and how we explore it is key to deploy human imagination, face the societal challenges of our era and conceive a better future. THANK YOU 