The exploration of the possible Vittorio Loreto I think we all guessed, at least once, how great minds achieved what they achieved. And the more astonishing their achievements are, the more we call them “geniuses”, perhaps aliens coming from a different planet, definitely not someone like us. But… is that true? Great achievements mean in the first place producing something new and no doubt that we all experience this. The new enters our lives in many different ways and we are all baffled by a question beautifully spelled out by Jim Morrisson: [Slide – Jim Morrison] “Can you picture what will be?”. Understanding how we explore the space of possibilities is key for progress and evolution and today I wish to share with you a new perspective on this. A perspective where mathematics and physics are providing us with new tools to start mapping out this space and grasping the way in which we explore it. [Slide – Newton] Is the story of Newton’ apple true? Probably not. Still, it is difficult to think that no apple at all was there. I mean some stepping stones, some specific conditions that made “Universal Gravitation” not impossible to conceive. And definitely this was not impossible, at least for Newton. It was “possible” and for some reason it was also there, available, to Newton, …at some point easy to pick as an apple. [Slide – Einstein] And what about Einstein? Was “Relativity Theory” another big leap in the history of ideas no one else could even consider? Or, rather, was again something “adjacent” and “possible” to Einstein and he got there by small steps in his very peculiar scientific path? The fact that we cannot even conceive his path does not mean that no path was there. I would bet that perhaps this is a situation in which the old saying [Slide – Neil Armstrong] “That’s one small step for a man, one giant leap for mankind” perfectly applies. All this seems very evocative, though hardly concrete. As a physicist I’ve learned that posing the right questions is half of the solution. So, let me just try to make this exercise with you to see how far we can push science to capture the very notion of the new. So, let me drive you at the edge of what is known (or at least what I’ve learned) and show you that what we know can be a powerful and fascinating starting point to grasp the deep meaning of words like novelties or innovation; even creativity. Perhaps the first question is about the very nature of the “new”, the way in which it enters our lives and how far we can frame it within a mathematical construction. The easiest way to quantify the emergence of novelties is to count them. How frequent are novelties? For instance a new song, a new book, a new person, a new word, editing a Wikipedia page, writing a new piece of free software. How common is experiencing the new? Well, let’s consider a simple example (though already non-trivial): a text. For instance this text. [Slide – just a placeholder] Let us imagine a language ...The language is meant to serve for communication between a builder A and an assistant B. A is building with building-stones; there are blocks, pillars, slabs and beams. B has to pass the stones, and that in the order in which A needs them. For this purpose they use a language consisting of the words 'block', 'pillar', 'slab', 'beam'. A calls them out; --B brings the stone which he has learnt to bring at such-and-such a call. -- Conceive of this as a complete primitive language. If we chase the occurrence of the new we can ask when new words – which means never occurred before in the text - appear. To this end let’s color in red all the words at their first occurrence. We get something like this: [Slide – just a placeholder] Let us imagine a language ...The language is meant to serve for communication between a builder A and an assistant B. A is building with building-stones; there are blocks, pillars, slabs and beams. B has to pass the stones, and that in the order in which A needs them. For this purpose they use a language consisting of the words 'block', 'pillar', 'slab', 'beam'. A calls them out; --B brings the stone which he has learnt to bring at such-and-such a call. -- Conceive of this as a complete primitive language. Now, if I plot the number of new (red) words as a function of the number of words read (which could be our measure of time), I get a plot like this [Slide – Heaps’ law] At the beginning all the words are basically new. This is expected, right? But if you now look up there, we observe a straight line. And a straight line in this kind of plots is not so trivial and deserves a short detour. Because this is a double logarithmic scale and we count things in powers of ten. In this scale a straight line means a power-law function, the same function describing the geometry of objects like this (a broccolo romanesco) [Slide – Broccolo romanesco] Power-laws are simple, though very special functions. They tell a story of strong regularities, the so-called scale invariance, which is an invariance in a very special space, that of zooming. You zoom, in or out, and something remains invariant. Like in this beautiful set due to Mandelbrot... [Slide with the animation of a Mandelbrot set] Power-laws are one of the signatures of complexity and, from what we just saw, we can already say that the emergence of the new is complex. I guess a writer knows this very well. Perhaps he or she does not care much about statistics. Still the Heaps’ law we just saw is telling us that some underlying patterns is guiding our creative process. [Slide – Heaps’ law] The strong regularity we just saw is not unique to texts. It occurs in many other systems we analyzed: [Slide – Heaps’ law for other systems] Can we understand why and can we explain these findings? Definitely not an easy problem. Think of it. You want to estimate the probability of a occurrence of something new, something that never occurred before. One typical solution is looking at the past. Think about compiling maps of risk for earthquakes, or the failures when trying to ground weather predictions on time series of past events. [Slide – Volvo: kangaroos] Sometimes looking at the future with the eyes of the past could be misleading. Look at this example where inference algorithms of self-driving cars were confused by these strange animals jumping here and there in the Australian outback! We now know that predictions have to be based on modeling, i.e., constructing a model of the phenomenon and simulating it, projecting into the future. And now we can do that with the help of a lot of data. Estimating the rate of occurrence of new events is a very old problem, and a lot of mathematicians proposed very clever solutions for it. One of the formulations is named “Species sampling" problem.  You want to count the number of species in a given environment. Suppose you are able to distinguish two different species in the first place (already non trivial). Now you wander in the environment and every time you see a new species you count +1. The problem now is to figure out how long you have to wait before encountering a new species. By definition, the new species is new, and so past observations cannot help us with this. We should find some other self-consistent way rather to estimate this probability and explain the laws we saw till now. The winter of 2012 was very special in Rome that experienced one of the greatest snowfall of its history. That winter was special also for me and my colleagues because we had an insight for a mathematical scheme to model the way in which novelties appear. Our insight was based on a beautiful concept proposed Stuart Kauffman, namely the “adjacent possible”.  The idea behind this is that whenever innovation occurs this does not proceed by large leaps. Rather it exploits, all those things (ideas molecules, technological products) that are already there, available and possible, perhaps recombining old elements in a brand new way. In this way we are looking at innovation as the exploration of a space, the space of possibilities.  It could be a physical space - the novelty here would be climbing for the first time Machu Picchu or … landing on the moon; it could be a conceptual space – acquiring new information and make sense of them; in a word: learning; but it could also be a biological space – think about the never-ending fight of viruses or bacteria with our immune system. Have you ever thought about this space, the space of the possible? Let’s play this game. Think about for instance “all” the possible things you could do in the next, say, 24 hours. Here the key word is “all”. Of course we can conceive a few options. But not all of them. And not all those that are possible. For instance, landing on the moon is certainly possible (not for everyone) but definitely not in the next 24 hours. Grasping the structure of the space of possibilities is very difficult. Also because it is continuously changing while we explore it. Today I meet a new person and this fact opens to me the possibility to meet all the friends of this new person. The metaphor is like this:  Suppose your environment is the graph depicted here and you explore it by jumping from one node to another. White nodes are those never explored before. In this sense they represent your adjacent possible. Now, if by chance you land on a white node, a new part of the graph now appears, that you could not even foresee in advance. Based on all this we proposed a mathematical formulation of the vision of the adjacent possible whose key point goes like this: the space of possibilities expands (or gets restructured) while you explore it. The first obvious consequence concerns (remember Newton and Einstein ?) whether innovation proceeds through little steps or large leaps. If our theory based on the adjacent possible is true we should conclude that Newton did not get the idea of the Universal Gravitation out of nothing, as a thunderbolt. Universal Gravitation was “possible” and “adjacent” to him. And the same for Einstein for General Relativity. Not for everyone else, of course. But I’m sure they got there by little steps. Perhaps at the outset they judged the possibility they were exploring as weird. But sometimes weird things are weird only because they are new to us. And perhaps these unfamiliar routes can lead us to some major breakthrough, who knows. So, again, reading the future with the lenses of the past could be sometimes misleading. Childs often don’t know that something is impossible and they just do it! Out theory of the adjacent possible allows to explain what we observed. For instance the statistical laws behind innovation: [Slide – Zipf’s and Heaps’ law] But there is much more. The very notion of adjacent possible encodes somehow the popular belief that “one thing leads to another”. I guess you all experienced this. You listen to a new song and this experience triggers your passion for the composer or her musical style. We can now give a scientific substance to this intuition and our theory based on the adjacent possible precisely predicts this. We call it the phenomenon of correlated novelties and we demonstrated it many different systems. [Slide with proofs of the correlated novelties] So novelties are correlated. This is the second consequence of the reality of the adjacent possible. But this implies that our future can be highly non-linear. We don’t know whether the story of Newton’s apple is true. What is very likely is that Newton did something at some point, or experienced something, even very small, that opened the possibility, to him, to conceive the Universal Gravitation. Big discoveries often don’t come from big premises. And very often they occur by chance. All this is fascinating to me. The whole notion is adjacent possible is. It tells a story about a space, the space of possibilities, and the way we constantly create and reinvent it. As a scientist I’m intrigued by the possibility to tackle all these questions in a quantitative way. For instance engaging people of all ages, like we did recently in a series of open events, in activities where they are challenged to explore their adjacent possible and create the new. This provides us with the opportunity to experimentally investigate the determinants of individual and collective creativity. [Video LEGO Sculpture https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SSLnqfIZjqI] Different actions will restructure your “possible” in different ways. Not all of them are equivalent. The Clash would say: “Should I stay or should I go”. [Slide – Should I stay or should I go] Should I retrace already known paths (exploiting)? Or should I perhaps launch in new adventures (exploring)? This we don’t know! What we discovered is that all the systems we investigated are right at the edge between “exploiting” and “exploring”. [Slide – Waves of novelties] If you think about music, this explains the existence of waves of popularity, which in turns explains why we don’t always listen to Mozart or Beethoven. Somehow a wise combination of “exploring” and “exploiting” is needed and this is clearly emerging from our theory. Which combination and how to know it in advance is something very difficult.  But I think we have now new tools for a scientific investigation of our adjacent possible and the way in which we explore it. For instance whenever we learn something or whenever we are creative in our research, business and everyday life. It is a long way to go but the questions and the tools are now there, adjacent and possible. THANK YOU 