The exploration of the possible Vittorio Loreto Let me start with a mystery and let me adopt Jim Morrison’s words to spell it out: [Slide with Jim Morrison and the lyrics. Perhaps a clip of Jim Morrison singing that specific verse.] “Can you picture what will be? So limitless and free”. This is a question that baffles all of us, right? The big mystery of “What will be my future?” or “What will be of me?” Well, of course I don’t have an answer but I can offer you a perspective. A perspective coming from science, looking at the breadcrumbs that the phenomena out there leave for us and developing and adopting new tools to make sense of them. In the specific case we’ll be trying to grasp the notion of the possible. After all, thinking about the future means thinking about the possible ways in which the future unfolds in front of us, right? As a scientist, I’m very much intrigued by the notion of “space of possibilities” and I’d like to drive you at the edge of what is known and show you how what we know is a starting point to grasp the deep meaning of words like novelties or innovation; even creativity. So, let me start over with a list. [Slide with the items appearing in sequence while I say them] * Meeting a new person * Listening to a new song * Discovering a new book * Editing a Wikipedia page * Writing a new piece of free software And the list can be much longer… You may wonder now… What all these activities have in common? Well, you could easily say that these are all performed by human beings (well, forget about bots for now!). Ok. Now let’s add some more hints and let’s extend the list: If you were a virus or a bacterium, I’m sure you would struggle to evolve into something your immune system cannot recognize and fight. If you were a prey in the savanna you would devise new strategies to trick your predator. If you were a Swedish self-driven car in the middle of the Australian outback you would definitely try to understand what is this strange “animal” jumping here and there - a Kangaroo, may be - and include it in the list of animals you already know: deer, elks, caribous. Well, enough with the examples. Again, what all these examples have in common? I would say that in all these cases the subject, be it a human, a species, a robot, is experiencing something new. The new! The new can be very personal. I meet a new person. I read a new book. Or, it can be new for all of us, like formulating a new theory or writing a new hit. In all cases we speak about something new. So, let’s look at the interesting hints the new is leaving for us and let’s start with a common, though not so obvious, example: a text. For instance this text (due to Wittgenstein) If we chase the occurrence of the new we can ask when new words (never adopted before in the text) appear. To this end let’s color in red all the words at their first occurrence. I get something like this: Now, if I now count the number of new (red) words as a function of the number of words read, I get a plot like this At the beginning all the words are basically new. No surprise. After a while we observe a straight line up there. This straight line is not so trivial and deserves a short detour. Because this is a double logarithmic scale, and in this scale a straight lines means a power-law function, the same function describing the geometry of objects like this (a broccoli romanesco) Power-laws are simple, though very special functions. They tell a story of strong regularities, the so-called scale invariance, which is an invariance in a very special space, that of zooming. You zoom, in or out, and something remains invariant. Like in this beautiful set due to Mandelbrot... Power-laws are everywhere in systems we call “complex”. They are one of the signatures of the complexity of our world. The power-law we see here is attributed to Harold Heaps (from whom it took the name) but originally discovered in the ‘60s by Gustav Herdan. It is very interesting because it is telling us something about the innovation rate. How many new words I encounter if I keep reading the text. What you can realize while looking at this picture is that the rate of innovation is decreasing while we progress in the book and it does it in a very peculiar way. The strong regularity we just saw is not unique to texts. It occurs in many other systems we analyzed: Now, any decent theory about the new and the possible should be able to explain already this. In the winter of 2012 with my colleagues Vito Servedio, Steven Strogatz and Francesca Tria we were wondering about this problem. Not an easy one indeed. Think of it. You want to estimate the probability of something that never occurred before. This is an old problem, and a lot of mathematicians proposed very clever solutions for it. One of the formulations is named “Species sampling" problem. You want to count the number of species in a given environment. Suppose you are able to distinguish two distinct species in the first place (already non trivial). Now the problem is to figure out the probability to encounter a new species. By definition the new species is new and so you don’t have a clue. We typically base our expectations on the past. Think about the maps of risk for earthquakes! But for novelties there is no past and one should find a self-consistent way to estimate this probability and explain the laws we saw till now. The winter of 2012 was very special in Rome that experienced one of the greatest snowfall of its history. An that winter was special also for us because we had an insight for a mathematical scheme to model the way in which novelties appear. For our formulation of the model we started from the so-called Polya’s urns (from the name of a Hungarian mathematician, George Polya). In the classical version of this model, balls of various colors are placed in an urn. A ball is withdrawn at random, inspected, and placed back in the urn along with a certain number of new balls of the same color. If I extracted red, at the next run it will be more likely to extract another red. This is a well-known phenomenon, known as “rich-get-richer''. This is another avenue to get power-laws and its ubiquity is extraordinary. This is where we started for our theory. In our generalization a urn, initially containing a certain number of balls of distinct colors, represents the set of possibilities we have at a given point of our evolution. Whenever we drawn a ball we turn it in our reality. Francois Jacob, would say, our “actual”. This actual is encoded in the time series, here named S, of all the extractions drawn from the urn, i.e., the history of the system. For instance the list of all the song you ever listened to. The dynamics now proceeds through two main mechanisms: reinforcement and innovation. At each time step one selects an element at random from the urn and records it in the sequence S. We then put the element chosen back into the urn along with a certain number of additional copies of itself (again rich-get-richer). The key assumption here concerns what happens if (and only if) the chosen element in the urn happens to be novel (i.e., it is appearing for the first time in the history of the system). In that case we put a certain number of brand new and distinct balls in the urn. These new elements represent the set of new possibilities triggered by the occurred novelty. This modeling scheme is encoding a very important concept, beautifully summarized by the famous biologist and complex-systems scientist Stuart Kauffman. Stuart coined the term “adjacent possible”, meaning “all those things that are one step away from what actually exists, and hence can arise from incremental modifications and recombination of existing material”. In Steven Johnson's words: “The strange and beautiful truth about the adjacent possible is that its boundaries grow as one explores them.” This is the key point of the adjacent possible: the conditional expansion (or restructuring) of the space of possibilities, conditional to the exploration of the space itself and the experience of the new. Let’s see now first the conceptual consequences of all this. For instance you could have the impression that new things occur like a thunderbolt. That Newton got the idea of the Universal Gravitation out of nothing. Out of the blue. Pure genius. Or Einstein general relativity. If our theory of the adjacent possible is true this seems far from being true. Somehow Universal Gravitation and General Relativity where “possible” and “adjacent” for our two champions. Not for everyone, of course. But I’m sure they got there by little steps, elaborating on something they knew and exploring very wisely the set of possibilities available to them. Perhaps at the outset they judged the possibility they were exploring as weird. But sometimes weird things are weird only because they are new to us. And perhaps these unfamiliar routes can lead us to some major breakthrough, who knows. So, reading the future with the lenses of the past could be sometimes misleading. Childs often don’t know that something is impossible and they do it! But there is much more. The very notion of adjacent possible encodes somehow the popular belief that “one thing leads to another”. I guess you all experienced this. You meet a new person and this encounter opens new perspectives and so on and so forth. Is that only our perception or can we can we give a scientific substance to it. We can indeed and our new theory based on the adjacent possible precisely predicts this. We call it the phenomenon of correlated novelties and it appears in many different systems. So novelties are correlated. This is the second consequence of the reality of the adjacent possible. But this implies that our future can be highly non-linear. We don’t know whether the story of Newton’s apple is true. What is very likely is that Newton did something at some point, or experienced something, even very small, that opened the possibility, to him, to conceive the Universal Gravitation. Big discoveries often don’t come from big premises. Very often they come from so tiny details to appear negligible. And very often they occur by chance (we would use the word serendipity), which means by the fortuitous exploration of something we would not explore in the first place. Non-linearity means this. Strong consequences can arise from almost negligible premises. All this is fascinating to me. The whole notion is adjacent possible is. It tells a story about a space, the space of possibilities, and the way we constantly create and reinvent it. As a scientist I’m intrigued by the possibility to tackle all these questions in a quantitative way. For instance we recently organized a series of open events, the Kreyon Days, whose aim was to engage people of all ages in activities where they were challenged to explore their adjacent possible and create the new. This allows for new paths towards the identification of the determinants of creativity. Different actions will restructure your possible in different ways and I guess we are all interested in knowing how we should choose among all the options we can see in front of us. Not all of them are equivalent. The Clash would say “Should I stay or should I go”. Should I retrace already known paths. Or should I perhaps launch in new adventures. This we don’t know! What we discovered is that all the systems we investigated are right at the edge between “exploiting” and “exploring”. Both “only” retracing old steps (exploiting) or “only” choosing new avenues (exploring) would presumably make our mankind disappear. We need a wise combination of both options. Which combination and how to know it in advance is something very difficult. But now I think we now have new tools to start investigating how to optimize the exploration of our adjacent possible. For instance when we learn something or when we run schools, research or business centers, companies, etc. It is a long way to go but the questions are now there, adjacent and possible. THANK YOU 