The birth of possible Vittorio Loreto I think we all guessed, at least once, how great minds achieved what they achieved. And the more astonishing their achievements are, the more we call them “geniuses”, perhaps aliens coming from a different planet, definitely not someone like us. But…is that true? [Slide with Newton] Let me start with an example. Is the story of Newton’ apple true? Probably not. Still, it is difficult to think that no apple at all was there. I mean some stepping stones, some specific conditions that made “Universal Gravitation” not impossible to conceive. And definitely this was not impossible, at least for Newton. It was “possible” and for some reason it was also there, available, to Newton, …at some point easy to pick as an apple. [Slide with Einstein] And what about Einstein? Was “Relativity Theory” another big leap in the history of ideas no one else could even consider? Or, rather, was again something “adjacent” and “possible” to Einstein and he got there by small steps in his very peculiar scientific path? The fact that we cannot even conceive his path does not mean that no path was there. All this seems very evocative, though hardly concrete if we really want to grasp the origin of great ideas, and, more generally, the way in which the new enters our lives. [Slide with “The New”] As a physicist, I’ve learned that posing the right questions is half of the solution. And I think we now start having a conceptual framework to conceive and address the right questions. So, let me drive you at the edge of what is known (or at least what I’ve learned) and show you that what we know can be a powerful and fascinating starting point to grasp the deep meaning of words like novelties or innovation; even creativity. So we are discussing about the “new”. The new can enter our lives in many different ways. It could be very personal, like listening to a new song, reading a new book, meeting a new person, learning a new word,… or could be global, what we call innovation, like a new theory, a new technology, but could also be a new book if your are the writer or a new song if you are the composer. In all these cases this is new for everyone. The new is always defying us in many different ways. And it is also scaring us because it makes us feel uncertain. But experiencing the new also means exploring a very peculiar space. [Slide with the “Actual” and the “Possible”] The space of the possible. The space of possibilities. [Slide with the “physical”, “conceptual” and “biological”] It could be a physical space - the novelty here would be climbing for the first time Machu Picchu (as I did in 2016) or … landing on the moon (as I did, well…no! not yet!); it could be a conceptual space – acquiring new information and make sense of them; in a word: learning; but it could also be a biological space – think about the never-ending fight of viruses or bacteria with our immune system. Unfortunately we are very bad at grasping this space. Think of it. Think about for instance “all” the possible things you could do in the next, say, 24 hours. Here the keyword is “all”. [Slide with “All” superimposed to the “physical”, “conceptual” and “biological” possible spaces] Of course we can conceive a few options: “having a drink”, “writing a letter”, “sleeping during this boring talk”. But not all of them. An alien invasion here, now, in Milan? So guessing and grasping this space of possibilities, is very difficult. Still we definitely need to explore it for our own sake and the progress of mankind. There is a good reason why we are very bad at conceiving the way in which we explore this space. [Slide with the “Actual” and the “Possible”] We are trying to conceive the occurrence of something new, something that never occurred before. One typical solution is looking at the future with the eyes of the past. This means looking at the time series of past events, hoping that this is enough to predict the future. We know this is not working. This was the first attempt, for instance, for weather forecast. And it failed, because of the great complexity of the underlying phenomenon. We now know that predictions have to be based on modeling, which means constructing a model of the phenomenon and simulating it, projecting the system into the future. And now we can do that with the help of a lot of data. Looking at the future with the eyes of the past could be misleading also for machines. Picture yourself now in the Australian outback. [Slide with the Australian Outback] You stand there, under the sun, and you see something weird. A car suddenly stops, very very far from a kangaroo crossing the street. You look closer and you realize that the car has no driver and it is not restarting even after the kangaroo is not there anymore. For some reason the algorithms driving the car cannot make sense of these new strange animal jumping here and there! What I just told you is a true story happened to Volvo self-driving cars in the Australian outback. [Slide with the kangaroo – Volvo] This is perhaps the last example of a problem that progressively will affect more and more our algorithms of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning. But this problem, that of coping with the occurrence of new events, we would say inferring the likelihood of something new, is very old and I think we now start having important clues to solve it. The winter of 2012 was very special in Rome that experienced one of the greatest snowfall of its history. That winter was special also for me and my colleagues because we had an insight for a mathematical scheme to model the way in which novelties appear. I remember that day, because due to the snowfall we were stuck in my department and we couldn’t go home. So we got another coffee and we kept discussing. And at some point we made a connection between the problem of the new and a beautiful concept proposed, years before, by Stuart Kauffman: the “adjacent possible”. [Slide of the Adjacent Possible] The idea behind this is that whenever innovation occurs this does not proceed by large leaps. Rather it exploits, all those things (could be ideas, molecules, technological products) that are already there, available and possible, perhaps recombining old elements in a brand new way. In Steven Johnson’s words “The strange and beautiful truth of the adjacent possible is that its boundaries grow as you explore them”. For instance if I speak about the space of my friends, my adjacent possible is the set of all friends of my friends, not already my friends. But if I now meet a new person, all her friends would immediately enter my adjacent possible, pushing its boundaries further. The mathematical structure of all this could be pictured like this: [Slide with the animation of the expansion of the adjacent possible] Suppose this is your universe and you explore it by jumping from one node to another. White nodes are those never explored before. In this sense they represent your adjacent possible. So you keep moving and at some point you touch the new. And what happens? What happens is there is a new part of the space, your adjacent possible, that appears at some point that you could not even foresee before touching that point. And besides this there is another huge portion of the space that could become possible at some later stages. So the whole space of the possible is not predefined. It is rather shaped and reshaped by our choices and actions. We were so fascinated by this whole idea and based on this we conceived our mathematical formulation of the adjacent possible, after more than 20 years since Kaufmann’s proposal. And our mathematical theory is based on a complex interplay between the way in which the space of possibilities expands (or gets restructured) and the way in which we explore it. After the epiphany of 2012 we kept working on the theory of the adjacent possible and we came up with a certain number of predictions to be tested in real life. The first prediction concerns the rate of innovation, I mean the rate at which we observe novelties in a given system. Our theory predicts that the rate of innovation is fairly regular, as you can see in these graphs where you have the number of novelties as a function of time under different conditions. In all cases we predict that the rate of innovation is decreasing over time. Everything goes lie if innovation is progressively more difficult. The specific figures depend on the specific system but the pattern is there. In order to see whether this prediction is verified in real systems we collected a lot of data about systems mirroring innovation in human activities. Terabytes of data about how we all create innovation in Wikipedia, Twitter, in the way we create free-software or the way in which we listen to music. In all these case we observed the same statistical patterns predicted by our theory: a regular growth with a decreasing rate of innovation. [Slide with Heaps’ laws for our modeling scheme and for various different systems] But there is much more. The very notion of the adjacent possible encodes somehow the popular belief that “one thing leads to another”. I guess we all experienced this. You listen to “Suzanne” of Leonard Cohen and this experience triggers your passion for Cohen and you frantically start listening to his whole production. And then you realize that Fabrizio De Andrè recorded an Italian version of Suzanne, and so on and so forth. We can now give a scientific substance to this intuition and our theory precisely predicts this. We call it the phenomenon of correlated novelties and it occurs in many different systems, for instance in the way we listen to music or the way in which we contribute to Wikipedia. Again a universal behavior with signature of strong patterns in the way we experience the new. So, novelties are not occurring randomly and this is good news because it implies that “impossible missions” could be not so impossible after all if we are guided by a good intuition leading us to trigger a positive chain reaction. The third important consequence of our theory concerns what we called waves of novelties. So if you think about music, without waves of novelties we would be listening only to Mozart or Beethoven. But we don’t do this all the time. We also listen to the Pet Shop Boys, even though I don’t know them. And this is clearly emerging from the huge amount of data we analyzed about very different systems – music, Wikipedia, free-software, Twitter. We discovered that popular hits are continuously born and die still leaving room for evergreens. Like in waves . Vagues in French. Waves of novelties. And not only our theory predicts these waves of novelties but it also explains why they are there. And they are there because we, as humans, display different strategies in the space of the possible. [Slide with “Should I stay or should I go”] Some people tend to retrace already known paths. We say they exploit. Some people always launch in new adventures. They explore. Despite these differences we discovered that overall all the systems we investigated are right at the edge between these two strategies. Perhaps 20% exploring, 80% exploiting. The specific fractions depend on the specific system. But the pattern is quite clear. It seems that a wise balance of past and future, “exploiting” and “exploring”, is needed at the collective level and this is clearly emerging from our theory. Now we can go back to the first question of whether innovation proceeds through little steps or large leaps. If our theory, based on the adjacent possible, is true, we should conclude that Newton did not get the idea of the Universal Gravitation out of nothing, as a thunderbolt. Universal Gravitation was “possible” and “adjacent” to him. And the same for Einstein for General Relativity. But our theory says that this is a general feature of the way all of us experience the new. Not only Newton and Einstein. We constantly have the opportunity to explore and push the boundaries of our own adjacent possible and innovate. All this is fascinating to me. The whole notion of adjacent possible is and our theory already provides us with clues and hints about the space of possibilities and the way we constantly create and reinvent it. All this has the potential to impact key activities like learning, research and business. But of course this is only the starting point of what I think will be a wonderful journey for a scientific investigation of the new, for us and for our machines. Artificial Intelligence will more and more need to rely on the structure of the adjacent possible to come up with algorithms ready to cope with the unknowns of the future. In parallel studies on how we shape and explore our adjacent possible will shed a new light on creativity and innovation processes, with the final aim to raise a generation of people aware of their potential and able to come up with new ideas to face the challenges in front of us. It is a long way to go but the questions and the tools are now there, adjacent and possible. THANK YOU 